+++
date = '2025-01-17T10:51:35-07:00'
draft = true
title = 'WRIT-101 Portfolio'
+++

```go
package main

import (
  "fmt"
  "os"
)

func main() {
  fmt.Println(os.Args[0])
}
```

### Portfolio Introduction

&emsp;Before college, I was a horrible student, always waiting to the last second and beyond, writing essays just a few hours before deadlines (to varying success). It was not really a surprise that I graduated with a 2.6. After highschool I went to work and grew up a little; and ended up going back to college. And it went pretty well! I did well in my classes, especially math and computer science, and have enjoyed a relatively high level of academic success ever since. But, old habits die hard, and a major vestige of my old behavior remains in the form of writing assignments, where I tend to rush things at the last minute, or turn in an essay that is really a mangled first draft. But, I’ve also improved since then. I’ve found I really enjoy writing personally. I’ve kept a journal of some kind for almost my entire post-adolescent life, often writing multiple pages a day without any kind of problem, but in recent years that has expanded to prose and publishing personal essays. I think you can see these parts of my background reflected in the strengths and weaknesses of each of my essays for this course. The research and argumentative essay showcase my weaknesses the best. The research essay starts with a decent introduction and an ok first paragraph, then peters off into a few half-baked arguments about the ethics of recommendation algorithms. My argumentative essay mentions a single idea proposed by each side, and spends a lot of time on random fluff because it never got edited down. Both of these essays suffer from me not taking the time to really think out the ideas of the essay in writing, edit them down, and present them in a balanced manner. The personal and epistolary essays are a bit better, being types of writing I am more comfortable with. They still suffer from similar issues as the research oriented essays, with the second epistolary essay ending abruptly without finishing out the paragraph, and the personal essay being more of an assortment of paragraphs because I couldn’t quite fit together a russian nesting doll essay, leaps in time, and an object and place based theme. With all that said, I think it is pretty clear that the major thing I need to address with each of my essays is getting them into a bit of a more polished state and then working on the endings. This is exactly what I have done with all four essays. For each essay I took the feedback from the essay you handed back to us and applied it, as well as reworked and finished up the ending ideas of each essay. In particular I focused on the informative essay, which I think is the worst of the four, and suffered from this half-finishedness the most, taking it from being something more about the implementation of recommender systems to talking about more of the social aspects and implications of technology use. That is all. Thanks for the class!

### Recommender Systems
&emsp;
Have you ever mentioned some word or product to your friends, only for it to come up as an advertisement on Amazon or Intragram just a few days later? You may have even suspected that some application on your phone or smart device was listening to you so that they could make that recommendation. Fortunately, cases of this are pretty rare. However in today's digital age, recommendation systems play a big role in our everyday lives. Almost everything we do online is affected in some way by a recommendation algorithm. Whether it's the shows we watch, the products we buy, or the content we see on social media, these algorithms are shaping what we do and see. Every time we open an app, website, or streaming service, these systems are there, quietly working behind the scenes to suggest what we might like next. However, while many people have some understanding of recommendation systems, to most, they are like black boxes that influence our choices without much explanation. By exploring what these recommendation systems are and aren't as well as understanding how they work, we can look at their effects on our society, both good and bad.

<t>For most of human history, information retrieval wasn’t really a problem. There wasn’t nearly as much information being produced as today and the information that did have to be stored and retrieved sat in libraries or archives, which were bounded in size by the physical space these documents occupied. This remained the case until the 1980s where it became more common for academic libraries to have large digital catalogs as digital storage was getting much cheaper (Candela et al.). Academics were presented with a problem. As the amount of information in their catalog grew, it became harder and harder to find the exact thing they wanted. The first attempt at addressing this problem essentially amounted to an improved version of search. Instead of just searching for a title, they could now filter by genre, page count, or anything you could have come to expect from a modern library database. While this was adequate if you already knew what you were looking for, it was hard to discover new documents or to search for something related to a document you had already found.

The very first recommendation systems tried to solve this problem by having users of a library database fill out questionnaires and then grouped them by stereotype based on their answers (Rich 3). Users who fell into certain stereotypes would be recommended a list of books based on their perceived interested (think Buzzfeed quiz). These first recommendation systems were simple compared to the ones we use today. Their goal was to make the recommendations of a good college librarian available to anyone. While they did not completely succeed in this, they did manage to improve the user experience by offering a bit more personalized help in finding information (Rich 16). Even though these early systems were not perfect, they were an important first step in making large amounts of information easier to navigate.
The reason these early recommendation systems are important to understand is because they never really went away. As technology progressed, more and more data became available, and companies started to realize that by using these kinds of recommendation systems, they could show users exactly what they wanted. In the 90s companies like Amazon were using techniques to recommend products based on purchase history, similar users, and review history. Every few years the cost of digital storage halved while in that same time period processors would double in performance. Eventually in the early 2010s came a new technique in machine learning, called deep learning. In machine learning there is a sort of tradeoff between different algorithms. Either an algorithm can take a simple approach, which might be right for simple examples, but cannot adjust to something more complex, or you can have a complex algorithm that can find really complex relationships, but might find ones that don’t exist if the data is too simple. Deep learning and in particular neural nets are an extreme example of the latter. In recent years neural nets have been used as the primary algorithm behind things like LLMs, capturing relationships as complex as pretty much all of human writing. These same systems began to be used for recommendation systems. These systems could now capture very subtle interactions in massive amounts of data, allowing them to optimize their predictions to the utmost.

This is also where things started to go a little bad. I mentioned that these new techniques in deep learning allow companies to optimize their predictions, but what are they optimizing for? And where are they getting all the data to train these things in the first place? While I do believe the privacy and personal data aspect of this issue is important, I think the greater issue at a really societal scale is the problem of what these algorithms are optimizing for. In general it’s profit. On paper it might be optimizing for something like watchtime like on Youtube or TikTok, but watchtime means more ads, and ads mean more profit. Unfortunately, this brings us away from the ideals of early recommendation systems, which were meant simply as an aid for people to discover things they cared about, as easily as possible. Even in the 80s all the way up to the early 2010s, the lack of sophistication in these systems meant that the best way of increasing a metric like watchtime to generate profit, was simply to have the best user experience out of all of your competitors. Now recommendation systems have been min-maxed to give you only as good of experience as keeping you watching the ads or buying the products. This might be a little melodramatic, but I think it is easy to notice things like Amazon. Are the products that Amazon recommends really as good as they could be? To me it mostly looks like they are sponsored advertisements, with just enough regular products that it retains a veneer of being a marketplace. The optimization of digital content for profit goes deeper than just Amazon though, especially when you get into the realm of entertainment. Platforms like Youtube and TikTok are really good. Not necessarily in the sense that they are good for you, or good for the world, but they definitely suck you in. My Youtube account is now about 15 years old and it is rare that I see anything that is recommended for me on a page that I do not want to watch. Notably it also really never exposes me to anything that challenges my world views. I don’t think I have to tell you what that means on a societal scale, partially because I don’t think anyone really knows, and partially because we have an intuitive feeling that might be pretty bad.

On the other hand, things could be worse. A lot of data is collected on you, but it probably isn't really outright spying (see footnote). I think there are a lot of very valid concerns over what information is being distributed and collected by governments and companies throughout the world.  I don’t think many people our age would give up what this new age of information has allowed us. I can’t really imagine what my life would look like without the immediate access to all sorts of information that technology has granted us and even though there are still major issues, in a way, I’m still grateful for it.

#### Recommender Systems Footnote

As I am reading more it actually kind of is outright spying, but not in that my phone is listening to me talk to my friends and then I get a really specific ad way. That’s probably some combination of the Baader-Meinhof Phenomenon and other sorts of behavior that is being recorded on your devices. It is outright spying in the sense that an ungodly amount of very simple information is being collected. All location, anything sensitive is pretty valuable, all browsing behavior, how long you look at certain things, your phone calls (that’s just our government though). Anything that is cheap to process and collect that can be easily tied to an identity and sold to other entities. Pretty creepy! Don't use proprietary software, it is bad for you.


### Epistolary Essays

Hello Mars,

How are you? It has been a while since I have seen you and I miss you. I hope you are doing well, but the main reason I am writing to you, once again, is to complain about our parents, and try to express a few of my feelings about how they have changed over the years.

I’ll start with the parents of our childhood. My first memories of them start without you. I remember every day me and Mom would take the train out of Lynn into Boston, to go to City Hall daycare. We’d descend into the subway, and emerge into this ghostly world of incandescent light. We took the Green Line, and the flexible segments in the middle of the cars would screech and groan all the way to our destination. In the winter, it was so cold in the cars, that my hands would stick to the poles and burn. I also remember coming out of the train station into downtown Boston, just by City Hall. The first thing you see after walking up the stairs is that giant brutalist building, although it didn't seem that imposing to me because I knew there was a playground up on the third floor.

And then you came along! By then our parents were much busier with work, but we still had fun. There were contant walks to the ocean, and visits with their friends. These are some of my favorite memories. I think you were old enough to remember them too. We would walk down, past the duck pond, and the rail yard, past the closest neighborhoods to the beach with their immaculate flower gardens, and down to the seawall. There was that point crossing the bridge over the train tracks, where you got just close enough to the ocean to smell the seaweed and taste the salt in the air. The best were the parties with their friends. I thought their friends were so cool. Once a week we’d go to some dinner party in Boston or Salem or Cambridge. They were always full of their friends from the schools or non-profits in the city. It’s hard to explain, but things felt so alive and interesting.

Then we moved to Missoula. This seemed to be where everything began. Everyone had to start over. I became a little bit of a problem after the move, Dad couldn't find a job for a while, we grew up, and their time became consumed by caring for their parents. It felt like things sort of just grayed out. Now that all our grandparents are gone I feel it more than ever. Most of what they talk about are things that they bought, or something they’ve watched. They don’t really do jokes. They keep getting unhealthier. It’s hard to remember who they were. It is also hard to not feel like they are wasting something, especially remembering our grandparents. Maybe I am just sentimental, or it’s because I was a child, but I feel as if they have lost something.

Anyway,

That’s all for my complaining!

Love,

Lorn


Hello Dear,

I hope you are doing well! I just re-read Boy by Roald Dahl so I am letter-pilled. Speaking of letters, I am writing this letter to you ostensibly to complain, but mostly to reminisce.

I have been thinking about how my parents have changed in recent years. You know how people say you either match your parents behaviors or go in the exact opposite direction?

Since my grandparents died they’ve been in a sort of funk. This funk has made itself manifest as constant buying and watching and consuming, all of which has been grating on me subtly. It does not feel like the right way to live. I know they are just enjoying their life.

I feel bad even writing about it, but it’s hard to ignore. It feels like when someone retires, and it’s all over. They watch TV now.

I remember when they weren’t like this, before they “retired” (this is where I get sentimental). I have great memories of living in Lynn. Things felt alive! (I am now realizing a good deal of why it felt alive is because I was still a child, not yet introduced to the internet, or any of the same forces that have set upon my parents).

My first memories of Lynn as a place began with City Hall. I went to daycare there before Mars was born. It is this gigantic brutalist building that looks totally out of place in the brick square it sits at the center of (you can look it up, it's famous). I also remember driving there, into downtown Boston, past the spire of Bunker Hill, looking at the USS Constitution in the harbor on my left, and passing over the Bunker Hill bridge with its giant white cable-stays. There is so much I would like to show you, so we should probably just go together.

A lot of what I remember is centered around the beach. It was only a 15 minute walk from our house, and even today, after 10 years, I could probably trace the path we took.

In fact I would like to.

Let’s start with our house. It was old and blue, with peeling paint that was probably full of lead. Imagine shoe-factory housing built in the late 1800s badly modified every few years since then (this is true), on a double lot, with a swing set, garden, and 500 kids in the backyard.

We’d leave from the backyard, and from there it was a straight shot to the duck pond. This was not any old duck pond. It was built as a large circle, with a path surrounding it, and a circular island in the center. There were four large jets that would shoot up 20-30 feet in the air, placed at even intervals in the water.

From there we would take a left, into the beautiful seaside neighborhoods in Lynn. Each home always had absurdly vibrant flowers, all right up against these little New England cottage homes.  I remember there was this one house that had a little frog porch ornament, that would ribbit every time we walked past and scare me. We’d continue on over a series of bridges, all going over the train tracks. At the final bridge, you could just barely hear the low roar of the waves and smell the ocean. After that was a small hill, and once you reached the top you could see over the sea wall, all the way out to Lynn Harbor.

All of these memories are still with me today, as vibrant as the days that they were made. It has been a long time since I have done anything like that with them. It’s not like we haven’t tried either. It is just different now.

Thanks for listening to me (reading me?) ramble for a whole letter.

Bye!

With love,

Lorn



### Against Sun and Steel

My first exposure to Yukio Mishima came in the form of Life for Sale, a novel telling the story of a young Japanese man who, for no reason in particular, decides to commit suicide, and when his attempt fails, decides to put his life up for sale. I had picked this novel randomly out of a shelf, just as something to read, and it completely blew me away, not because it was some epic work of literature, but because the author clearly had a conception of beauty and death that was far different to anything I had ever seen. So I continued to read his novels and finally ran into Sun and Steel, an autobiographical essay about Mishima's transition from a sickly young man who lived a life solely of the mind, to being physically strong through the use of sunlight and steel implements, and how this process of cultivating the body leads to greater spiritual enlightenment. I was excited to read the essay, as it had been highly recommended by fans of Mishima, and because it was his only non-literary work. However, as I read, I felt an adverse reaction, not to the main ideas in the essay, but to Mishima’s worldview. His glorification of suicide and the beauty of death made me uncomfortable. This discomfort came from the context in which Sun and Steel was written. Much of Mishima's romanticized view of death comes out of Japan’s experiences in World War II. However, Mishima fails to acknowledge the brutal realities faced by Japan during World War II, where acts like mass suicide were far from glorious and involved immense suffering. The following sections will explore this disconnect, beginning with Mishima's portrayal of death in Sun and Steel, followed by a contrast with the harsh realities experienced by Japan during the war.

Throughout Sun and Steel, Mishima presents his romantic ideals surrounding death. Specifically, he continually portrays death as something that is highly desirable, especially as a chance to prove yourself, or when something beautiful is being destroyed. Towards the beginning of the essay Mishima describes his change in perception of the sun. When he was a boy he would stay up late into the night, “... treating the sun as an enemy…” (Sun and Steel 25). Then, after Japan's defeat in WWII, Mishima began to view the sun as a destructive force, one that for him was associated with the image of death. For him, the power in the sun lays in its unceasingness, in how it beats down on youth going in droves to their deaths, off “...blood flowing  ceaselessly from flesh, and on the silver bodies of flies clustering on wounds.:” (Sun and Steel 18). These scenes are described as imagery of radiant glory. Later in the essay, Mishima introduces us to his relationship with steel. Again death is brought in as well. A major reason for Mishimas weight training was that he was not able to join the military during WWII as he was not physically fit. He lacked, in short, “...the muscles suitable for a dramatic death.” (Sun and Steel 25). He saw the beautiful body as something to be destroyed. Finally, later in the essay he refers directly to the suicide corps who made up the pilots of kamikaze aircraft. He speaks about the “...beautiful last testimony of the suicide corps…” and how the pilots gained an identity with their final act (Sun and Steel 78).

However, the reality of death for Japanese soldiers in WWII was not nearly as romantic. Many of the examples given in the sources I found are truly heartbreaking. There are the obvious kamikaze pilots, many of whom, especially later in the war, died long before they got to any sort of ship to run into. In Guadalcanal over 10,000 died of disease and starvation (Haley). Throughout the war many Japanese are sent continually on suicide missions by their commanders. But the most striking example of this reality comes at Saipan, in 1944. Saipan was a small Japanese held island that the US military had landed on and was currently invading. As it became clear that they were going to lose, the Japanese began committing suicide at incredible rates. Many were killed in suicide charges into American forces, often only armed with sticks, grenades, and knives. Many civilians, including whole families, died by jumping off cliffs or blowing themselves up with grenades. Some of those who wavered were shot by Japanese snipers to make sure they did not surrender (“World Battlefronts: THE NATURE OF THE ENEMY | TIME”).

These tragic accounts are a stark contrast with Mishima’s romanticized portrayal of death in Sun and Steel. When faced with the reality of WWII for Japan, the glorification of suicide and sacrificial death in Mishima's work overlooks the immense suffering and senseless loss that characterized the war. Many of these deaths were needless, and while something beautiful was destroyed, I fail to see the glory in it. While the essay provides a window into Mishima's personal philosophy, its romanticism feels hollow rather than profound.



### For Sun and Steel

The first time I read Sun and Steel, I knew barely anything about Yukio Mishima. I had read his novel Life for Sale, which made sure I knew Mishima was unusual, and very different from myself. I also knew that he had killed himself through ritual disembowelment, although I did not know what that signified for him. I knew something about the time and country that he lived in, being Japan during and after World War II. While this was a good start, it is a far cry from the amount required to attempt to understand a person as strange as Yukio Mishima. So I went about reading what I could about the author. The first source seemed the most obvious, Confessions of a Mask, an autobiographical I-novel written by Mishima when he was only 21 years old. This turned out to be all I needed. After reading Confessions of a Mask, I understood that Sun and Steel is a remarkably honest and intense culmination of a lifelong struggle with identity. Sun and Steel represents an attempt on Mishima's part to regain control over his identity, an attempt that ultimately fails and results in his death.

In the beginning of Confessions of  a Mask, Mishima is 12 years old, and finds an image of a painting of St. Sebastian in one of his fathers textbooks. He is overwhelmed by the sexuality of the image, and ends up masturbating for the first time (Confessions of a Mask 41).  Mishima describes not just the beauty of male form depicted in the painting to be incredibly sensual for him, but also what is being done to him. In the painting, St. Sebastian is being executed and shot to death by arrows. The novel continues with his next sexual interest, another boy in his grade named Omi. Omi is described as being bursting to the brim with life and energy, specifically in his body, and of seeming solid and strong, as opposed to Mishima who is frail (Confessions of a Mask 48). Mishima expresses both desiring Omi and wanting to be Omi.

Knowing this about Mishima, it makes much more sense that he ended up where he did. His obsession with death and the male form, and his own relative frailty led to a conception of a perfect body bursting with energy as an ideal. This is also where the theme of masks in Mishimas work comes into play. One of the major themes in Mishimas work is the conflicts between the masks we wear. In Mishimas case this conflict was often extreme, and after a certain point it seemed as if death was the resolution of this conflict.

### Fit

I am writing this on the morning of Wednesday November 20th at 6:28am from the closet office attached to the bedroom me and my wife share in our university village apartment. I can just barely see Fiona and the cat in the light from my lamp, both sleeping in bed. It has been two years since we got married and about six months since the last of my grandparents died.

Fiona and I got married on September 6th, 2022. We were both 19, with my birthday falling only a few days before the wedding. The circumstances surrounding the wedding were a little unusual and yet also completely ordinary. We had met in our freshman year of highschool and were good friends for the first few years, then started dating just weeks before the lockdowns. When things resumed, we took advantage of our reduced school and work obligations to spend every day together. Eventually we graduated and decided to move cities together as well. Fiona moved into a dorm and I got an apartment. The first night alone in your own apartment, away from the city and people you grew up with, is a strange experience. It did not take long to get into the habit of spending most nights together, and after a while we moved in together in all but name. A year passed. We moved into a house together and got a cat. My grandparents on my dad’s side were not doing well. My Grandpa’s dementia had been worsening and my Grandma had been diagnosed with cancer, so they moved to Missoula. We had also decided to elope in secret. It turns out it does not take that much to get married. One visit to the courthouse and proving we were not drunk got us a marriage license. One phone call got the wedding scheduled. Unfortunately Fiona’s family got her sick right before the wedding, so I had to give a sheepish call to cancel, and assure the lady on the phone that everything was really all right and she was just sick. So we rescheduled, and on September 6th, 2022, we had a wedding. I remember it quite vividly. It was a Tuesday. We both went over to the courthouse after our classes and met our friends on the courthouse steps. Together we made our way to the judges office. The ceremony was short and very sweet. Our friends cried. The pictures were terrible.

When I first got married my ring barely fit. I’ve always messed with whatever I’ve been holding and the ring became the object of my fidgeting. I would slide it on and off whenever I was thinking or walking or waiting. Over time my finger became calloused from this action and it became harder to do. Now, after several years of manual labor and going from a teenage boy to somewhat man-shaped, the ring no longer comes off at all.

I remember being fourteen and attending the celebration for my grandparents 50th wedding anniversary. My Grandpa gave a speech and was asked if he had any relationship advice to share. He said, to grow and let the other person grow. At that moment I became very curious about what it means to spend your life with someone.

My Grandma slept for two days before she died. Just a week before she had seemed normal, and almost healthy. We all sat and waited in the living room, outside their bedroom in the nursing home, occasionally talking quietly or getting up to go hold her hand and speak with her for a few moments. Realizing this would be the last time I saw them together, I asked him about their life together. They had met when they were freshman in college, each camp counselors at the respective girls and boys Lutheran summer camp. He said he was captivated by her. They dated for a few years, graduated, and immediately joined the Peace Corps and moved to Guam. After two years they had my Dad and moved back to the States. My grandpa went to law school and she worked. My uncle was born soon after. They moved around for many years, until my uncle was in high-school, settling in Madison Wisconsin. He opened a law firm specializing in elder law and she stopped working as a nurse and physical therapist and opened a holistic medical practice best described as sort of an intersection between massage and therapy. Many years pass and their son has a child (me). My Grandpa halts his law career and becomes an ordained Unitarian Universalist minister, and starts doing a mix of itinerant preaching, deathbed and prison ministry, and serving their local UU church.

It was very unusual for me to see my Grandpa die. When he was young, we would have looked almost identical. He suffered from Lewy Body dementia for six years before dying. It wasted his muscles, motor neurons, and memory, but largely left him intact. He wasted so badly he had to move his wedding ring to his right hand, where it hung loosely. A few days before his 76th birthday he had a stroke, fell, and slept. In the morning he woke briefly and talked with my family, had a milkshake, and went back to sleep. He slept for nine days, without food or water, before dying. Fiona said we slept the same too. Similar mannerisms. His funeral was at the church he was ordained at, built by Frank Lloyd Wright.

My grandparents grew up on farms surrounded by generations of family. Like many Americans of their generation, they moved away to go to school, and to work. Their children followed suit. My Dad moved from Wisconsin to Missoula where he met my mom, and they got married in turn. To start their careers they moved to Boston. I grew up there, surrounded by their friends, with only visits from family coming a few times a year. I grew up away from my family, only really getting to know them in the brief years that we moved back to Missoula, when they were already sick and dying. It is very difficult to get to know someone as you are coming into your own as an adult, and they are wasting away mentally and physically. It was at the very moment I was old enough to wonder where I came from that I became unable to really ask him about himself. It was also the point where I had begun to recognize and admire him. As a person, he seemed like he was me gone right. We had lived very similar lives as young men, both quiet, reserved, somewhat unusual, reading constantly, married to very dynamic and spirited women quickly and at a young age, and both seeming to have a similar way of seeing the world. The only difference being I could see the man he had become; someone who in my estimation treated everyone around him well, was beloved by his community, friends, and family, and had done a lot of good in many people's lives.

I am writing this a few days later, on Monday November 25th, at 7:03 am. I am again looking out on my wife and cat in the light of my desk lamp, from the office closet where I work in the mornings, as is my habit. I have been thinking back on my life and the lives of my family. My grandparents came from families with a connection to the land and each other. They moved away, with all the best intentions, but in doing so left something behind. My parents did not have a connection to a particular place, and neither do I. I owe a great deal to my grandparents, and much of what I value comes from them. But we differ in one particular place. I do not plan to move away from my family. Even if at times I find my parents grating, and even if sometimes I dislike Missoula, I do recognize what they have to offer my children. Even just staying in the same place would probably be enough. Everything my grandparents seemed to value in their lives came from staying in Madison. It is hard work to find a place in this world, and not only fit in, but ingrain yourself so deeply that it becomes a part of you. I don’t know what that does to you, but I have a vague feeling that it is important. I am curious to see what it will be like.



